So Yogi Bai, thanks for making the time to have this conversation with us today. Thank you for watching. You’ve had a bit of a fun journey. We’ve known each other since maybe we were two or three years old.
But uh you've had a very interesting life teaching at Columbia, lecturing at universities around the world, and uh all along the way I think you've also, from whatever I've seen, uh had a very unique experience, you know, of living a life with Pramuksayaman, which you've also put into a book in Love Addis.
Um but today I really was eager to talk to you for something you’ve done more recently. So 2024 you got your PhD thesis, congratulations. And uh but in that talk a lifetime. Yeah. Oh I wanna hear about that.
So we did that you did that and it was about the Paramhansa and their bhakti poetry, if I understand that, right? Um and that's something that I was very curious to know about because the only stuff that I know about bhajans and kirtans is what I've heard in Sabha and I haven't really been able to go beyond that in my education.
So I was really eager to have you here, so I’m happy you had the time today. Um but I do want to start off right away with that thesis in terms of you’re you’re a journalism person, you’re speaking, you know, at CBS New York, you're doing all of that. How does that pivot?
into bhakti poetry and doing this PhD.
Probably twenty years ago, eighteen, nineteen years ago. Really a lifetime ago. Really a lifetime ago. At least a generation. Um when I was on air, I had a conversation with my guru, his holiness Pramuxa Maharaj. And he didn't specifically tell me to go study um
uh in the academy. Well what he said to me was um quite fascinating when you think of the the the sort of broad-minded vision that gurus in general have for their disciples.
Kyogi, everyone does something for themselves, their families, their own careers, things that help uh their Pratishta is the word he used. Um fame, standing, position. But what are we doing to give back to society?
That is the question I want you to ask yourself. And so I thought in my mind maybe he's asking me to be a monk, maybe he's asking me to um give back by doing some humanitarian service of sorts, and I think what he pointed at was education.
He said, What do you know about Hinduism? What do you know about the Swaminar and Sampraday? And how can then, after educating yourself, how can you share that with our community, the broader Hindu community, and those who are curious about engaging with Hinduism and the Swamrina and Sampranadai.
And as you know, there are millions who are. If you just think of all of the swaminand mandirs around the world, um specifically BAPS Mandirs, and you think of how many visitors we have, that means those people are curious to know more about Hinduism and uh more specifically the Swamina and Sampraday.
And what are we doing to share important aspects and facets of our past, of our present, of our music and literature, and some of our guiding principles with them is what I got from my conversation with Purung Saymara.
Right. Right about that time. Right about that time. I was on air um four, five, six around that time. So when I say on air, I was um at CBS and so that was the time when uh I made the shift. I went to Columbia University, sat in on a course, uh, with my um academic Guruji,
a John Stretton Hawley, who's um more popularly known as Jack Hawley. Um and Jack Hawley Sub I sat in on a course. I remember it was
Right up my alley. It was called um North Indian Bhakti Texts.
Um that's something they teach at Columbia. At Columbia, yeah. See these are things we don't know. That this sort of stuff is in the acad in kind of the zeitgeist or at least in academia already, yeah. Yeah, and and quite popular. Uh quite popular that course. Um we l uh read um
and in my case saying uh Surdas Jeiz buds, Kabir Jiz buds, Ravidas Jiz buds, Mirabai’s buds, um, etc. etc. etc.
And I think that's when it clicked for me and I said, this is what I wanted to do. Then came up the conversation about what it is that I would study, right? Because you have to start off with um a broad understanding of world religions, Hinduism, uh and then
hone in on this one particular topic that you really want to um uh get your um PhD. So we all speak Gujarati so you’ll understand this joke that um a bunch of my friends, especially here in India have PhD ni kichuri. So what is that one topic that you really want to t dive into?
I think that one course with Jack Hollisab really made me start thinking about the Swaminar and Sampraday and the sort of treasure, the trove of bhakti pads that we have. Before we get too far at the buds, I want to take you back a second. Okay.
Maybe wrap up the diversity part. Okay. Not that there's such a thing as wrapping it up. But like so you were we had started this whole section about diversity by talking about how these even the four poets that you had chosen were diverse. Brahman Swami's the poet's poet, very structured and traditional in a in a in a
Charan tradition, um and you said for foremost poets and educators and then you know performers in a in a second kind of level. And whereas you said Bremananswami is more of the musician and and you know his voice and and other instruments are his instruments, poetry to him was the second thing and that's why sometimes maybe he would break meter and do those things.
Muktaan's family. And very diverse languages, yeah. Different languages, but also different genres. So if you think of ragas, uh drupad, kayal, we won't get into all of this, but different genres of classical, all the way down to folk folk and if folk ma the one thing that we should mention are his garbis
Garbis which are uh usually buds that can be sung and then um uh repeated uh uh by uh uh a larger audience. And those garbis became so popular um in the sampraday and outside of the Sampraday. In fact, Dalpat Ramji
um who was, you know, s uh celebrated by many in Gujarat as the sort of father of modern literature, Gujarati modern literature. He had said that once he heard Prahmananswami singha Garbian, it was so effective, it was about Maharaj's uh um uh dhamagamant. So he’s reverting to Akshardham.
And he goes, and so many years, I think eleven or twelve years after Maharaj Dharma get teare prema nan swami gatata um and that environment um charged theguyo that many people started crying s a mukloko uh unconscious take yeah, so there was this power in his music.
So this power in the words, but also in the performance of those words. So that's how diverse Brahman is. Nishkam and Sami. These are the four. So these two you've gone through.
What how do you categorize Mukhtan Swami and Nishkam and Swami? So Mukhtan and Swami was um from what we understand and and I have a lot more work left to do on on Mukhtan and Swami, I I admit that first and foremost. But Mukhtan and Swami was raised uh
Um in fact uh one of my colleagues uh who has written about this, um Professor Arun Brahma often talks about the sort of influence of Kashmiri Shaivism on Narsi Meta and then later if I understand correctly, if I if I recall correctly, on Mukta and Swami as well. So this
uh lasting effect of being raised in a Shaiva background, which is very different from a Vaishnav background and I really just don't have the time to get into that. But even Hinduism was so diverse at the time, right? If you think of uh Vaishnavism and and the sort of great uh uh uh overall bhakti of Vishnu and the avtars of Vishnuji.
Vishnu Bhagwan and Krishna Bhagwan etc. on that one side. Shaivism um and uh and Shaktism and the Mataji and the goddess worship on that side. And how diverse all three of them were in terms of language, theology, uh cultural repertoire, practice.
um dietary habits. I we can keep going on and on and on. And yet amidst all of that, in that diversity that Mukhtalan Swami had from his Shaiva and Bhakta background, some influence from uh his interactions with Jains as well, etc. And all of that, Mukhtanin Swami was able to come to Gujarat.
Become um uh Ramananda Swami, who was Bhagwan Swaminarayan's guru as we know, his Shishya, and then being the senior disciple uh of uh Ramananda Swami, then accepting Bhagwan Narayan as his not just his guru.
Because Ramanand Swai was his guru, but his Ishtadev. Right? This is another thing we forget. Um, most of these people were so accomplished, especially when you think of Mukhtananswai and Brahmananswami, um, before ever having met Bhagwan Sominar.
We're so accomplished and then to accept Bhagwan Swaminarayan as their Ishtadeva and we'll get into what that means. Like not just a spiritual master, but as the the the Supreme Being, Supreme Divine Being, Puruna pushvatam Narayan Parabrahma.
Um and I think to be able to do that, and while doing that, Mukhtanan Swami was also writing in five or six different languages his poetry. Mukhtanan Swami was also writing in various genres. Mukhtananswami was a great dancer. So Mukhtanan Swai there's a a a very um
I forget exactly which Vat text, um is it Prasad Swami's Vatos where Mukhtanan Swami emna pagiti nrutya kartakarta dance kartakarta, he was able to draw a peacock. Um so you just ima imagine the the the immense amounts of and diverse amounts of talent
that these Paramhansa had. And so that was Mukhtan and Swami with the uh remnants of these different um other religious and sectarian communities. And then finally uh Nishkuran Sami Nishkuran Swami. Also multi-talented, carpenter and
Meets Gunate and Swami at a young age, they're doing Ghoshti from their original sampraday, then becomes a sadhu through a journey. What's his kind of musical pedigree as you put them in this like four set of four? I would I would describe Mukneshg.ur and swami And it's so hard to you know say in black and white give. Yeah, we don't have to. No, because you can't.
You can't. Right? And we'll get into that when we talk about the Mukta and Sai's dancing and you've got Brahman and Swami who's like speaking to the royal courts to Bandirs and doing the Bangrur and and the and the Navabs, um so the Muslim rulers and Junagar and Mangdur. But so we're talking about Nishkuran Swami. The one thing that that hits me about Nishkuran Swami.
was that he was much older than Preman and Swami. Um
He had seen life before he became a renunciant. And he says it best in a put that's attributed to him, in which he talks about Gare Gara at that time gara like karts, uh, right? Because
um go dan at that time. If you had um cows and bulls, you had done or you had wealth at the time um in that sort of agrarian society that we l mercantile society that we lived in. So he said keatu Maripa had a lot of land on which there was uh farming happening. So Nishwan Sui himself.
And so he was um a man who uh he was a worldly man, if you see what I'm saying. Yeah, he was married, he had kids, he left all of that aside. We'll get to how he did leaves that aside. Um
And then after taking Diksha, he becomes Tyagi Tyagi. You know how we said Brahman and Swami was a poet's poet? What do I mean by that? Again, we go back to his butts. Um
Nishkuran Swami's memory is closely tied to the village, dusty, sleepy village of Dolera today. I think there's this big push right now to make Dolera into this smart city and the current uh dispensation government is is working on that, has been working on it for a while. But um
For as long as one can remember it over the last two, three, four hundred years. Yeah, even when we’ve gone like let’s say a decade ago to do that our five years ago. And there's a beautiful Mandir there now. The current uh administration is working on this master plan and I I truly encourage everyone to go see Dolera.
That's when you truly realize Nishkuran and Swami's Mahima for several reasons. You look at the town and then you see the stark difference that the man there is and has the gate that he's carved with his own hands and like those things. Um the Kaman. Yeah. The Kaman is the archway. And now they've I think um it's gold plated. So that particular Kaman
So stands out. So you don't get anishkuran swe ni pr uh prasadi kamant. So I think th those are the kinds of things that I would encourage people to go see. Um if you want to see that uh a quick aside, if you want to see something like that material about Brahman and Swami Murti a Murti and Buj I would recommend it.
two places where his disciple Parampara and Junagar. Though a lot of Junagar was lost in the um there was a fire in the uh the Haveli. So a lot of his texts and his instruments were lost in that. But Murti and Bhujar are great places uh to go visit. Um so but
My point is that Nishkurananswami went from being a worldly man to a Tyagistrian. And then I think the one thing that we all of us, especially those of us who are interested in history, have to salute him for was that he was a true historian.
In the vernacular. In the vernacular. So it’s like accessible to the to the everyman, right? To be able to read that history themselves.
I don't the thing about Nishkon Swami that I want to kind of hear from you is like did he write before? Like is there poetry before he becomes a sadhu?
It's a good question. as he becomes a Tyagi and is joining all this, amongst all of his renunciation.
this art, this vibrancy of art lives both in his through his craftsmanship and also through this poetry. I think that's also interesting. To usually when people think of like, you know, the thyagis Tyagi, it's somebody sitting in a in a cave or sitting in a mountain or sitting in you know the desert.
just in stark meditation. But here’s a person who has extreme simplicity.
Um and sometimes I want to move to this topic a little bit later about you know the categories we put people in, but it's like if you put them in the category of Tyagi and the Tyagi is Tyagi, then you're thinking as famously, you know, Ludnapive, he was like, you know, he was taking extreme vows of simplicity.
Let me tell you what some of those vibrancy of life in terms of art is just as rich. Exactly. So this balance between uh renunciation and the aesthetic, right? Um and in fact one of the Vachanamrut um that Bhagwan Swaminarayan um the number is escaping my memory. um
Actually no, Gunatya and Swami Vatuma, one of the references to Nishkuran Swami is not just for his Tyagan Vairagya, but Gunatyan Swami said can Nishkudan Swami Ju hate neprem Bhagwan swamin mate joined at this balance of being able to let go, but also to love.
And I think that is the beauty of bhakti, right? But if I can give you some examples, you can Bhagwan samnir nam kiduki, tam nesopvich.
He's like, I'm gone. Right. Um and and even when that conversation was had for whether to give that to him in Garira or whatnot as well. Um and then he says in one of his pads that I want future sadhus and my disciples to know kimantay make.em li djecum
And he describes what kind of a gam Dolera is uh Dolera is. Um if you don't mind it, I just wanna quickly pull it up. and in in in it he he goes, you know, don't for a second think that I did this because I wanna become uh power. And I wanna become some big
Um place because that dusty, sleepy town who we're talking about, at least it’s water is rare. Water is scarce there, right? There's no there's no large amounts of agricultural um produce perfect.
There’ll be maybe one or two pack that you’re growing there. But you’re not getting like four types of vegetables in your in your home garden that being grown on a regular basis. So I feel like so if we look at this first section of what we’ve talked about, what I’m what I’m taking away from that first section is that
The times um were such that a variety of people were coming to Gujarat. In that in that kind of ecosystem, Bhagwan Swaminarayan establishes the fellowship and we kind of appreciate what establis mehedans. It’s not just coming and planting a flag, but it's saying that the c
you know, building that sense of community by instructing people to write books and do things in the vernacular as well as in Sanskrit and so many other languages. And along with that beliefs, practices, festivals, right? Gadra Pratham three where Maharaj talks about Amesama Yakem Variyach. To bring people together. Right.
So he he’s actively kind of creating this community and in his own time he’s allowing a lot of diversity within that community. So and a diversity to be very clear about that is that the philosophical principles are uniform.
Right? Everybody believes in the same Tatvagnan, let's say, that Bhagwan Samran is putting out. Everyone is is the Ishtadev, Bhavna, and those things are all there. But around that, because each of those people come from different backgrounds, not just geographically, but even from faith different faith traditions.
Like you said, you've got Shaive tradition people like Magni Dam and others who are coming in, you've got Bhakta tradition people, you've got Vaishnav tradition people. And they're all kind of coalescing around Bhagwan Swamiran and seeing him as the Ishtadev in that own lifetime. Bishop Haber famously mentioned this in his diary that Bhagwan Somnan travels
And in that travel, there's a diversity of people around him. Because he probably saw Miyaji and Ratanji and all these people from different backgrounds all being there together. So Maharaj has, in a very active way, created a diverse community. And I think that is a lesson I take strongly because I think it identifies this idea that
We can there can be people who share values, that share philosophy, that share praxis, and still have quite a bit of diversity. We can’t we sometimes in our own heads maybe we start imagining that everybody in Satsang is the same.
Or everybody’s likes and dislikes and everybody’s behavior because we’re trying to go to the same ideal should be uniform. But that that’s not true. There’s a lot of diversity that is welcome by Maharaj himself in his time and is welcome today as well and, exists today if we’re just open enough
receive it, interact with it, and kind of take it as part of it.
