 So Yogi Bhai, thanks for making the time to have this conversation with us today.
 Thank you.
 You've had a bit of a fun journey.
 We've known each other since maybe we were two or three years old.
 But you've had a very interesting life, teaching at Columbia, lecturing at universities around
 the world.
 And all along the way, I think you've also, from whatever I've seen, had a very unique
 experience of living a life with Pramukh Swayamaj, which you've also put into a book in Love at
 Ease.
 But today, I really was eager to talk to you for something you've done more recently.
 So 2024, you got your PhD thesis.
 Congratulations.
 It took a lifetime.
 I want to hear about that.
 So we did that, and you did that, and it was about the Paramansas and their bhakti poetry,
 if I understand that, right?
 And that's something that I was very curious to know about, because the only stuff that I
 know about bhajans and kirtans is what I've heard in Sabha, and I haven't really been able
 to go beyond that in my education.
 So I was really eager to have you here, so I'm happy you had the time today.
 But I do want to start off right away with that thesis, in terms of, you're a journalism
 person, you're speaking at CBS New York, you're doing all of that.
 How does that pivot into bhakti poetry and doing this PhD?
 Probably 20 years ago, 18, 19 years ago.
 Really a lifetime.
 Really, a lifetime, at least a generation.
 When I was on air, I had a conversation with my guru, His Holiness Pramukh Sai Maharaj.
 And he didn't specifically tell me to go study in the academy.
 What he said to me was quite fascinating.
 When you think of the sort of broad-minded vision that gurus, in general, have for their
 disciples.
 Pramukh Sai Maharaj said to me, that Yogi, everyone does something for themselves, their
 families, their own careers, things that help their pratishta, is the word he used.
 Their standing.
 Fame, standing, position.
 But what are we doing to give back to society?
 That is the question I want you to ask yourself.
 And so I thought, in my mind, maybe he's asking me to be a monk.
 Maybe he's asking me to give back by doing some humanitarian service of sorts.
 And I think what he pointed at was education.
 He said, what do you know about Hinduism?
 What do you know about the Swaminar and Sampradai?
 And how can then, after educating yourself, how can you share that with our community, the
 broader Hindu community, and those who are curious about engaging with Hinduism and the
 Swaminar and Sampradai?
 And as you know, there are millions who are.
 If you just think of all of the Swaminar and Mandirs around the world, specifically BAPS
 Mandirs, and you think of how many visitors we have, that means those people are curious to
 know more about Hinduism, and more specifically the Swaminar and Sampradai.
 And what are we doing to share important aspects and facets of our past, of our present, of our music
 and literature, and some of our guiding principles with them, is what I got from my conversation
 with Pramuk Saimara.
 This is like 2004, 5, 2, 3?
 Right about that time.
 Right about that time.
 I was on air 4, 5, 6 around that time.
 So when I say on air, I was at CBS.
 And so that was the time when I made the shift.
 I went to Columbia University, sat in on a course with my academic guruji, John Stratton
 Hawley, who's more popularly known as Jack Hawley.
 And Jack Hawley Sahib, I sat in on a course.
 I remember it was right up my alley.
 It was called North Indian Bhakti texts.
 That's something they teach at Columbia?
 At Columbia, yeah.
 See, these are things we don't know, that this sort of stuff is in the zeitgeist or at least
 in academia already, yeah?
 Yeah, and quite popular.
 Quite popular, that course.
 We read, and in my case sang, Surdas Ji's pads, Kabir Ji's pads, Ravidas Ji's pads, Mirabai's
 pads, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
 And I think that's when it clicked for me.
 And I said, this is what I wanted to do.
 Then came up the conversation about what it is that I would study, right?
 Because you have to start off with a broad understanding of world religions, Hinduism,
 and then hone in on this one particular topic that you really want to get your Ph.D.
 So we all speak Gujarati, so you'll understand this joke that a bunch of my friends, especially
 here in India, have.
 Your Ph.D.
 So what is that one topic that you really want to dive into?
 And I think that one course with Jack Hawley Sahib really made me start thinking about the
 Swaminar and Sampradai and the sort of treasure, the trove of Bhakti pads that we have.
 Before we get too far at the pads, I want to take you back a second.
 So we can kind of maybe wrap up the diversity part.
 Okay.
 Not that there's such a thing as wrapping it up.
 But like, so we had started this whole section about diversity by talking about how these,
 even the four poets that you had chosen were diverse.
 Brahman and Swami is the poet's poet, very structured and traditional in a Charan tradition.
 And you said foremost poets and educators and then performers in a second kind of level.
 And whereas you said Preman and Swami is more of the musician and, you know, his voice and
 other instruments are his instruments, poetry to him was the second thing.
 And that's why sometimes maybe he would break meter and do those things.
 And very diverse as a musician.
 He was singing ragas, different languages, but also different genres.
 So if you think of ragas, dhrupad, khayal, we won't get into all of this, but different
 genres of classical all the way down to folk.
 And if folkma, the one thing that we should mention are his garbis, garbis, which are usually
 pads that can be sung and then repeated by a larger audience.
 And those garbis became so popular in the sampradai and outside of the sampradai.
 In fact, Dalpat Ramji, who was, you know, celebrated by many in Gujarat as the sort of father of modern
 literature, Gujarati modern literature, he had said that once he heard Preman and Swami
 singa garbis and it was so effective.
 He was about Maharaj's dhamagaman.
 So he's going, reverting to Akshar dham.
 And he goes, and so many years, I think 11 or 12 years after Maharaj dhamagya,
 and that environment charged that many people started crying, so there was this power in
 his music, this power in the words, but also in the performance of those words.
 So that's how diverse Preman is.
 He, yeah, I mean, we could go on for Preman and Swami for a while, because I love him as
 a poet as well.
 But then you said Muktanan Swami and Nishkanan Swami.
 These were the four.
 So these two you've gone through, how do you categorize Muktanan Swami and Nishkanan Swami?
 So Muktanan Swami was, from what we understand, and I have a lot more work left to do on Muktanan
 Swami, I admit that first and foremost, but Muktanan Swami was raised among Shaivas.
 In fact, one of my colleagues who has written about this, Professor Arun Brahmat, often talks
 about the sort of influence of Kashmiri Shaivism on Narsi Mehta, and then later, if I understand
 correctly, if I recall correctly, on Muktanan Swami as well.
 So this lasting effect of being raised in a Shaiva background, which is very different from
 a Vaishnav background, and I really just don't have the time to get into that.
 But even Hinduism was so diverse at the time, right?
 If you think of Vaishnavism and the sort of great overall bhakti of Vishnu and the avatars
 of Vishnuji, Vishnu Bhagavan and Krishna Bhagavan, etc., on that one side.
 Shaivism and...
 And then Shaktism.
 And then Shaktism and the Mataji and the goddess worship on that side.
 And how diverse all three of them were in terms of language, theology, cultural repertoire,
 practice, dietary habits.
 We can keep going on and on and on.
 And yet amidst all of that, in that diversity that Muktanan Swami had from his Shaiva and Shakti
 background, some influence from his interactions with Jains as well, etc.
 And all of that, Muktanan Swami was able to come to Gujarat, become Ramanan Swami, who was Bhagavan
 Swami Narayan's guru, as we know, his Shishya.
 And then being the senior disciple of Ramanan Swami, then accepting Bhagavan Swami Narayan as his...
 Not just his guru, because Ramanan Swami was his guru, but his Ishtadev, right?
 This is another thing we forget.
 Most of these people were so accomplished, especially when you think of Muktanan Swami and
 Brahmanan Swami, before ever having met Bhagavan Swami Narayan.
 We're so accomplished, and then to accept Bhagavan Swami Narayan as their Ishtadev, and we'll
 get into what that means, like not just a spiritual master, but as the supreme being, supreme divine
 being, Purnapushottam Narayan, Parabrahman.
 And I think to be able to do that, and while doing that, Muktanan Swami was also writing in
 five or six different languages, his poetry.
 Muktanan Swami was also writing in various genres.
 Muktanan Swami was a great dancer.
 So Muktanan Swami, there's a very, I forget exactly which vat text, was a Prasadhan Swami's
 vat, where Muktanan Swami, he was able to draw a peacock.
 So you just imagine the immense amounts of, and diverse amounts of talent that these Paramahans
 were, and so that was Muktanan Swami with the remnants of these different other religious
 and sectarian communities.
 And then finally, Nishkuralan Swami.
 Also multi-talented, carpenter, and meets Gunatana Swami at a young age, they're doing
 ghoshti from their original sampradai, then becomes a sadhu through a journey.
 What's his kind of musical pedigree, as you put them in this like four, set of four?
 I would describe Nishkuralan Swami, and it's so hard to say in black and white.
 Yeah, we don't mention all of them.
 Brahmanswami abad che.
 Yeah, yeah, yeah.
 No, because you can't.
 You can't.
 Right?
 And we'll get into that when we talk.
 Like you're talking about Muktanan Swami's dancing, and you've got Brahmanswami who's
 like speaking to the royal courts to build these mandirs and doing all these things.
 So we're talking about Nishkuralan Swami, the one thing that hits me about Nishkuralan
 Swami was that he was much older than Premanan Swami.
 He had seen life before he became a renunciant, he had seen life, and he says it best in a
 pad that's attributed to him, in which he talks about gara gara, at that time gara, like
 carts, bara dhata, right?
 Because go dhan at that time.
 If you had cows and bulls, you had dhan, or you had wealth at the time, in that sort
 of agrarian society that we, the mercantile society that we lived in.
 So he said, eh ha tu maari paase.
 I had a lot of land on which there was farming happening.
 So Nishkuralan Swami himself keha chai, maari paase atlo, atlo, atlo ha tu, eh mukhi
 ne pashi mein Bhagavan Swami narna hathe dikshali dihi.
 And so he was a man who, he was a worldly man, if you see what I'm saying.
 He was married.
 He had kids.
 He left all of that aside.
 We'll get to how he did, leaves that aside.
 And then after taking niksha, he becomes a tyagi's tyagi.
 You know how we said Brahman and Swami was a poet's poet?
 Poet's poet, yeah.
 A tyagi's tyagi.
 What do I mean by that?
 Again, we go back to his buds.
 Nishkuralan Swami's memory is closely tied to the village, dusty, sleepy village of
 Dolera today.
 I think there's this big push right now to make Dolera into this smart city and the current
 dispensation government is working on that, has been working on it for a while.
 But for as long as one can remember it over the last two, three, four hundred...
 Yeah, even when we've gone like, let's say a decade ago to Dolera or five years ago.
 And there's a beautiful mandir there now.
 The current administration is working on this master plan and I truly encourage everyone
 to go see Dolera.
 That's when you truly realize Nishkuralan Swami's maima for several reasons.
 You look at the town and then you see the stark difference that the mandir is and has been.
 The gate that he's carved with his own hands.
 The kamaan.
 Yeah.
 The kamaan is the archway.
 And now they've, I think, it's gold-plated.
 So that particular kamaan stands out.
 And so you know that Nishkuralan Swami is not prasad in the kamaan.
 So I think those are the kinds of things that I would encourage people to go see.
 If you want to see that, a quick aside, if you want to see something like that material
 about Brahman and Swami.
 Muri.
 Muri and Buj, I would recommend it.
 Two places where his disciple Parampara and Junagar.
 A lot of Junagar was lost in the, there was a fire in the Tahaveli.
 So a lot of his texts and his instruments were lost in that.
 But Muri and Buj are great places to go visit.
 So my point is that Nishkuralan Swami went from being a worldly man to a Tiaghi.
 Extreme renunciate.
 And then I think the one thing that we, all of us, especially those of us who are interested
 in history, have to salute him for, was that he was a true historian, a true record.
 In the vernacular.
 In the vernacular.
 So it's like accessible to the, to every man, right?
 To be able to read that history themselves.
 I don't, the thing about Nishkuralan Swami that I want to kind of hear from you is like,
 did he write before?
 Like, is there poetry before he becomes a Sadhu?
 It's a good question.
 Nothing that, that can be, that we can be traced back in to sort of say, I record Nishkuralan Swami.
 There's no attributed, like, book or this or that to him from before.
 And yet, as soon as he becomes a Tiaghi and is joining all this, amongst all of his renunciation,
 this art, this vibrancy of art lives both in his, through his craftsmanship and also through
 this poetry.
 I think that's also interesting.
 Usually when people think of, you know, the Tiaghi-Stiaghi, it's somebody sitting in a,
 in a cave or sitting in a mountain or sitting in, you know, the desert just in, in stark
 meditation.
 But here's a person who has extreme simplicity.
 And sometimes I want to move to this topic a little bit later about, you know, the categories
 we put people in.
 But it's like, if you put them in the category of Tiaghi and the Tiaghi-Stiaghi, then you're
 thinking as famously, you know, dhudhna apiveh, he was like, you know, he was taking extreme
 vows of simplicity.
 Let me tell you what some of those vows are.
 And yet vibrancy of life in terms of art is just as rich.
 Exactly.
 So this balance between renunciation and the aesthetic, appreciating that.
 And in fact, one of the Vachana Amraths that Bhagavan Swaminarayan, the number is escaping
 my memory.
 Actually, no, one of the references to Nishkuran Swamy is not just for his Tiaghi and Vairagya.
 But Gunatiyan Swamy said that Nishkuranan Swamy, which is the name of Bhagavan Swaminarayan
 Maathe, which is the name of God, the name of God, the name of God, the name of God.
 So this balance of being able to let go, but also to love.
 And I think that is the beauty of bhakti, right?
 But Nishkuranan Swamy, if I can give you some examples.
 We want to make you the mahanth of Dholera.
 He ran away.
 Yeah.
 He's like, I'm gone.
 Right.
 And even when that conversation was had for whether to give that to him in Gharada or whatnot as
 well, and then he says in one of his pads that I want future sadhus and my disciples to know
 that what is going on in Gharada?
 And he describes what kind of a gaam Dholera is.
 If you don't mind, I just want to quickly pull it up.
 And in it, he goes, you know, don't for a second think that I did this because I want to become
 Power.
 Yeah.
 And I want to become some big place because
 You know, Dholera really is that dusty, sleepy town we were talking about, at least.
 Water is rare.
 Water is scarce there, right?
 There's no large amounts of agricultural produce per se.
 Maybe one or two paak that you're growing there, but you're not getting like four types
 of vegetables in your home garden that's being grown on a regular basis.
 Certainly not.
 So I feel like, so if we look at this first section of what we've talked about, what I'm
 taking away from that first section is that the times were such that a variety of people
 were coming to Gujarat.
 In that kind of ecosystem, Bhagavan Swam Nairn establishes the fellowship and we kind of
 appreciate what established means.
 It's not just coming and planting a flag, but it's saying, you know, building that sense
 of community by instructing people to write books and do things in the vernacular as well
 as in Sanskrit and so many other languages.
 And along with that, beliefs, practices, festivals, right?
 Gajda Pratham 3, where Maharaj talks about
 To bring people together.
 Right.
 So he's actively kind of creating this community.
 And in his own time, he's allowing a lot of diversity within that community.
 So, and the diversity, to be very clear about that is that the philosophical principles are
 uniform, right?
 Everybody believes in the same Tattva Gnan, let's say, that Bhagavan Swam Nairn is putting
 out.
 Everyone is the Ishtadev, Bhavana, and those things are all there.
 But around that, because each of those people come from different backgrounds, not just geographically,
 but even from different faith traditions, like you said, you've got Shave tradition people
 like Magni Ram and others who are coming in.
 You've got Shakta tradition people, you've got Rational tradition people.
 And they're all kind of coalescing around Bhagavan Swam Nairn and seeing him as the Ishtadev
 in that own lifetime.
 Bishop Haber famously mentioned this in his diary, that Bhagavan Swam Nairn travels.
 And in that travel, there's a diversity of people around him.
 Because he probably saw Mia Ji and Ratan Ji and all these people from different backgrounds
 all being there together.
 So Maharaj has, in a very active way, created a diverse community.
 And I think that is a lesson I take strongly because I think it identifies this idea that
 there can be people who share values, that share philosophy, that share praxis, and still
 have quite a bit of diversity.
 We can't, sometimes in our own heads maybe, we start imagining that everybody in satsang
 is the same.
 Or everybody's likes and dislikes and everybody's behavior, because we're trying to go to the
 same ideal, should be uniform.
 But that's not true.
 There's a lot of diversity that is welcomed by Maharaj himself in his time and is welcomed
 today as well and exists today if we're just open enough to receive it, interact with it,
 and take it as part of it.
 Thank you.
